**Couchbase Lite Core** (aka **LiteCore**) is the next-generation core storage and query engine for [Couchbase Lite][CBL]. It provides a cross-platform implementation of the database CRUD and query features, as well as document versioning.

All platform implementations of Couchbase Lite 2.0 will be built atop this core, adding replication and higher-level language & platform bindings. But LiteCore may find other uses too, perhaps for applications that want a fast minimalist data store with map/reduce indexing and queries, but don't need the higher-level features of Couchbase Lite.

**THIS IS NOT A RELEASED PRODUCT. THIS IS NOT FINISHED CODE, OR EVEN ALPHA.** This is currently (October 2016) a work in progress. See "Status" section below.

## Features

* Database CRUD (Create, Read, Update, Delete) operations:
    * Fast key-value storage, where keys and values are both opaque blobs
    * Iteration by key order
    * Iteration by _sequence_, reflecting the order in which changes were made to the database. (This is useful for tasks like updating indexes and replication.)
    * Optional multi-version document format that tracks history using a revision tree (as in CouchDB) or version vectors
    * Timed document expiration (as in Couchbase Server)
    * API support for database encryption (as provided by ForestDB and SQLCipher)
    * Highly efficient [Fleece][FLEECE] binary data encoding: supports JSON data types but
      requires no parsing, making it extremely efficient to read.
* Map/reduce indexing & querying:
    * Index API that uses a database as an index of an external data set
    * Map-reduce indexes that update incrementally as documents are changed in the source DB (as in Couchbase Lite or CouchDB)
    * Limited full-text indexing
    * Limited geo-indexing
    * JSON-compatible structured keys in indexes, sorted according to CouchDB's JSON collation spec
    * Querying by key range, with typical options like descending order, offset, limit
* Direct database querying:
    * Currently only supported in SQLite-based databases
    * JSON-based query syntax for describing what documents to find and in what order
    * Can search on arbitrary document properties without requiring any schema
    * Queries compile into SQL and from there into SQLite compiled bytecode
    * Parameters can be substituted without having to recompile the query
    * Queries don't require indexes, but will run faster if indexes are created on the document
      properties being searched for.
* Pluggable storage engines
    * [ForestDB][FDB] and SQLite are available by default
    * Others can be added by implementing C++ `DataFile` and `KeyStore` interfaces
* C and C++ APIs
* Bindings to C# and Java (may not be up-to-date with the native APIs)

## Platform Support

LiteCore runs on Mac OS, iOS, tvOS, Android, various other flavors of Unix, and Windows.

It is written in C++ (using C++11 features) and compiles with Clang, GCC and MSVC.

An earlier version of LiteCore, known as CBForest, has been in use since mid-2015 in the iOS/Mac version of [Couchbase Lite][CBL] 1.1, and since early 2016 in the 1.2 release on all the above platforms.

## Building It

**Note:** After checking out this repo, make sure you've also checked out the submodules. Run `git submodule update --init --recursive`.

### macOS, iOS

Open **Xcode/LiteCore.xcodeproj**. Select the scheme **LiteCore dylib**. Build.

### Linux

    cd build_cmake
    ./build.sh

**Note:** If you get compile errors about missing headers or libraries, you'll need to install the appropriate development packages via your package manager. This is especially true on Ubuntu, which comes without the development packages for common libraries like SQLite and OpenSSL. (TBD: Add a list of `apt` packages here.)

## Documentation

We have [online C API documentation](https://couchbase.github.io/couchbase-lite-core/C/html/modules.html), generated by Doxygen from the headers.

If this is out of date, or you want a local copy, you can generate your own by running the following commands from a shell at the root directory of the repo:

    cd C
    doxygen
    
The main page is then located at `Documentation/html/modules.html`.

## Status

**As of October 2016:** Under heavy development. Watch out for falling I-beams! 

* The primary development platform is macOS, so the Xcode project should always build, and the code should pass its unit tests on Mac.
* The CMake (Linux) build and Visual Studio project are generally up to date but may fall behind, as may the C# bindings. 
* The Java bindings may be out of date or incomplete.

## Authors

Jens Alfke ([@snej](https://github.com/snej)), Jim Borden ([@borrrden](https://github.com/borrrden)), Hideki Itakura ([@hideki](https://github.com/hideki))

## License

Like all Couchbase source code, this is released under the Apache 2 [license](LICENSE).

[FDB]: https://github.com/couchbase/forestdb
[CBL]: http://www.couchbase.com/nosql-databases/couchbase-mobile
[FLEECE]: https://github.com/couchbaselabs/fleece
